Active Record Migrations Documentation (#7)
Ridhwana/rails: guides/source/active_record_migrations.md

Migrations are a feature of Active Record that allows you to evolve your
database schema over time. Rather than write schema modifications in pure SQL,
migrations allow you to use a Ruby Domain Specific Language (DSL) to describe
changes to your tables.

After reading this guide, you will know:

* The generators you can use to create migrations.
* The methods Active Record provides to manipulate your database.
* The details of manipulating migrations and your schema.

> * Changing existing migrations.

Reviewer: Should match the other bulletpoints:
- How to change existing migrations
- How to maintain referential integrity
Or:
- Changing existing migrations
- Maintaining referential integrity

Author: ✅

* How migrations relate to `schema.rb`.
* Referential integrity.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Migration Overview
------------------

Migrations are a convenient way to [alter your database schema over

> time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schema_migration) in a consistent way. They

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migrations are a convenient way to [evolve your database schema over
time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schema_migration) in a consistent way. They
```

use a Ruby [DSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language) so that
you don't have to write SQL by hand, allowing your schema and changes to be
database independent. We recommend that you read the guides for [Active Record
Basics](active_record_basics.html) and the [Active Record
Associations](association_basics.html) to learn about the some of the concepts

> mentioned here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Associations](association_basics.html) to learn more about some of the concepts
mentioned here.
```

You can think of each migration as being a new 'version' of the database. A
schema starts off with nothing in it, and each migration modifies it to add or

> remove tables, columns, or entries. Active Record knows how to update your

Reviewer 2: "add or remove tables and columns" makes sense. Wondering if we need to clarify what is "entries" or maybe remove that word?

Author: I suspect what was initially meant by "entries" is "making changes to existing data (i.e. entries)", and while migrations primarily focus on modifying the database schema rather than directly altering existing data, you can technically include operations that manipulate data as part of the schema changes (but from what I understand, it's not a best practice). 

Hence, I'm feeling a bit at odds on whether to change this to "A schema starts off with nothing in it, and each migration modifies it to add or remove tables, columns, or by making changes to existing data" or omit it completely, but if we omit it then we're ignoring the fact that we can manipulate data entries as part of the schema.

also enables smooth rollback functionality. In case of reverting the migration,
Active Record intelligently handles the removal of the table, maintaining
database consistency throughout the process. You can read more about reversing
migrations [here](#using-reversible).

Generating Migrations
----------------------

### Creating a Standalone Migration

Migrations are stored as files in the `db/migrate` directory, one for each
migration class.

The name of the file is of the form `YYYYMMDDHHMMSS_create_products.rb`, that is
to say a UTC timestamp identifying the migration followed by an underscore
followed by the name of the migration. The name of the migration class
(CamelCased version) should match the latter part of the file name. For example,
`20240502100843_create_products.rb` should define class `CreateProducts` and
`20240502101659_add_details_to_products.rb` should define class
`AddDetailsToProducts`. Rails uses this timestamp to determine which migration
should be run and in what order, so if you're copying a migration from another
application or generate a file yourself, be aware of its position in the order.

> Of course, calculating timestamps manually is tedious, so Active Record provides a

Reviewer: This example feels out of place. What is the connection between timestamps and part numbers here, or what is this solving for exactly?

Author: We're trying to say that the timestamps are generated automatically for you when creating a migration. Hence, when you generate a migration (the migration name, in this case, is AddPartNumberToProducts), you don't have to manually update the filename with a unique timestamp/version, but instead, Active Record does this for you already.

I reworded it to make it more clear.

Active Record intelligently handles the removal of the table, maintaining
database consistency throughout the process. You can read more about reversing
migrations [here](#using-reversible).

Generating Migrations
----------------------

### Creating a Standalone Migration

Migrations are stored as files in the `db/migrate` directory, one for each
migration class.

The name of the file is of the form `YYYYMMDDHHMMSS_create_products.rb`, that is
to say a UTC timestamp identifying the migration followed by an underscore
followed by the name of the migration. The name of the migration class
(CamelCased version) should match the latter part of the file name. For example,
`20240502100843_create_products.rb` should define class `CreateProducts` and
`20240502101659_add_details_to_products.rb` should define class
`AddDetailsToProducts`. Rails uses this timestamp to determine which migration
should be run and in what order, so if you're copying a migration from another
application or generate a file yourself, be aware of its position in the order.

Of course, calculating timestamps is not fun, so Active Record provides a

> generator to handle making it for you:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, calculating timestamps manually is tedious, so Active Record provides a
generator to handle making it for you:
```

This will create an appropriately named empty migration:

```ruby
# db/migrate/20240502101659_add_part_number_to_products.rb
class AddPartNumberToProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
  end
end
```

This generator can do much more than prepend a timestamp to the file name. Based
on naming conventions and additional (optional) arguments it can also start

> fleshing out the migration.

Reviewer 2: The sections that follow are an example of actions that will happen based on the migration name. So maybe adding something like:

"Here are some examples of automatically generated migrations based on conventions followed by the file name"

something like that..

end
```

### Creating Associations

The generator accepts column type as `references`. [References](#references) are
a shorthand for creating columns, indexes, foreign keys, or even polymorphic
association columns.

For example, generating the following migration will create a `user_id` column
and additionally create an index on that column.

```bash
$ bin/rails generate migration AddUserRefToProducts user:references
```

generates the following [`add_reference`][] call:

```ruby
class AddUserRefToProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    add_reference :products, :user, null: false, foreign_key: true
  end
end
```

with the following changes to your schema:

```ruby
  t.uuid "user_id", null: false
  t.index ["user_id"], name: "index_products_on_user_id"
```

`belongs_to` is an alias of `references`, so the above could be alternatively
written as:

```bash

> $ bin/rails generate migration AddUserRefToProducts user:belongs_to

Reviewer 2: Interesting, didn't know about belongs_to

```

generating a migration that looks like the same as the previous one.

There is also a generator which will produce join tables if `JoinTable` is part
of the name:

```bash
$ bin/rails generate migration CreateJoinTableUserProduct user product
```

will produce the following migration:

```ruby
class CreateJoinTableUserProduct < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_join_table :users, :products do |t|
      # t.index [:user_id, :product_id]
      # t.index [:product_id, :user_id]
    end
  end
end
```

You can learn more about associations [here](association_basics.html).

[`add_column`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-add_column
[`add_index`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-add_index
[`add_reference`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-add_reference
[`remove_column`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-remove_column

> ### Model Generators

Reviewer 2: Is it worth making this more descriptive? Took me a second to figure out what this section is about...something like:

```suggestion
### Other Generators that Create Migrations
```

> The model, resource, and scaffold generators will create migrations appropriate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the `migration` generator, the `model`, `resource`, and `scaffold` generators will create migrations appropriate
```

end
```

> ### Creating Associations

Reviewer: This is the first mention in this guide about Associations, and I was a little lost. Should we intro to give a little more context and link to association_basics.html?

Author: This makes sense, I've gone though all these sections again, and made sure that we have a small intro at the start where necessary and we've linked out appropriately.

The generator accepts column type as `references`. [References](#references) are
a shorthand for creating columns, indexes, foreign keys, or even polymorphic
association columns.

For example, generating the following migration will create a `user_id` column
and additionally create an index on that column.

```bash
$ bin/rails generate migration AddUserRefToProducts user:references
```

generates the following [`add_reference`][] call:

```ruby
class AddUserRefToProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    add_reference :products, :user, null: false, foreign_key: true
  end
end
```

with the following changes to your schema:

```ruby
  t.uuid "user_id", null: false
  t.index ["user_id"], name: "index_products_on_user_id"
```

`belongs_to` is an alias of `references`, so the above could be alternatively
written as:

```bash
$ bin/rails generate migration AddUserRefToProducts user:belongs_to
```

> generating a migration that looks like the same as the previous one.

Reviewer: "the same as above".

Author: ✅

There is also a generator which will produce join tables if `JoinTable` is part
of the name:

```bash
$ bin/rails generate migration CreateJoinTableUserProduct user product
```

will produce the following migration:

```ruby
class CreateJoinTableUserProduct < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_join_table :users, :products do |t|
      # t.index [:user_id, :product_id]
      # t.index [:product_id, :user_id]
    end
  end
end
```

> You can learn more about associations [here](association_basics.html).

Reviewer: Ah here it is. Link should be higher and some context added above, and then this section should lead in with something like: "To deep dive into these methods further, check out:"

Author: ✅

end
```

> TIP: When seeking further details about generators, you run `bin/rails generate

Reviewer: TIP: For further help with generators, run `bin/rails generate
--help`. Alternatively, you can also run `bin/rails generate model --help` or `bin/rails generate migration --help` for help with specific generators.

Author: ✅

> ### Creating a Table

Reviewer: OK this threw me for a moment - specifically the difference between Generating Migrations and Writing Migrations. All of the below goes into the migration file created in db/migrate, right? If so I think that would be helpful context to add above.

Author: > specifically the difference between Generating Migrations and Writing Migrations. 

I see how this can be confusing!

> All of the below goes into the migration file created in db/migrate, right?

Correct.

I've updated the Writing Migrations section to add this context

```
Once you have created your migration using one of the generators from the above
[section](#generating-migration-files), you can update the generated migration
file in the `db/migrate` folder to define the specific changes you want to make
to your database schema.
```

I've also renamed the ffg headers to be a bit more explicit and hopefully clearer: 
- Generating Migrations to Generating Migration Files 
- Writing Migrations to Updating Migrations

```ruby
create_table :products do |t|
  t.references :category
end
```

This will create a `category_id` column. Alternatively, you can use `belongs_to`
as an alias for `references`:

```ruby
create_table :products do |t|
  t.belongs_to :category
end
```

You can also specify the column type and index creation using the `:polymorphic`
option:

```ruby
create_table :taggings do |t|
  t.references :taggable, polymorphic: true
end
```

This will create `taggable_id`, `taggable_type` columns and the appropriate
indexes.

#### Primary Keys

By default, `create_table` will implicitly create a primary key called `id` for
you. You can change the name of the column with the `:primary_key` option, like
below:

```ruby
class CreateUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :users, primary_key: "user_id" do |t|
      t.string :username
      t.string :email
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

This will yield the following schema:

```ruby
create_table "users", primary_key: "user_id", force: :cascade do |t|
  t.string "username"
  t.string "email"
  t.datetime "created_at", precision: 6, null: false
  t.datetime "updated_at", precision: 6, null: false
end
```

> You can also pass an array to `:primary_key` for a composite primary key.

Reviewer 2: Might be an opportunity to link to the composite primary key guide here.

This method creates a `products` table with a column called `name`.

#### Associations

If you're creating a table for a model that has an association, you can use the
`:references` type to create the appropriate column type. For example:

```ruby
create_table :products do |t|
  t.references :category
end
```

This will create a `category_id` column. Alternatively, you can use `belongs_to`
as an alias for `references`:

```ruby
create_table :products do |t|
  t.belongs_to :category
end
```

> You can also specify the column type and index creation using the `:polymorphic`

Reviewer: Useful to link to polymorphic associations here: association_basics.html#polymorphic-associations

Author: ✅

end
```

#### Comments

You can pass the `:comment` option with any description for the table that will
be stored in the database itself and can be viewed with database administration
tools, such as MySQL Workbench or PgAdmin III. It's highly recommended to

> specify comments in migrations for applications with large databases as it helps

Reviewer 2: Interesting. I've never worked on an application where I've seen database comments. Wonder how common these are in the wild..

Author: Based on my research they seem to be more of a fit for large databases but it's hard to tell whether they're common. I'm open to removing this section if the general consensus is that it's not adding too much value.

Reviewer: I'd leave it in if the previous wording was 'highly recommended'. It's also kind of interesting! (IMHO)

end
```

#### Comments

You can pass the `:comment` option with any description for the table that will
be stored in the database itself and can be viewed with database administration
tools, such as MySQL Workbench or PgAdmin III. It's highly recommended to
specify comments in migrations for applications with large databases as it helps
people to understand the data model and generate documentation. Currently only
the MySQL and PostgreSQL adapters support comments.

```ruby
class AddDetailsToProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    add_column :products, :price, :decimal, precision: 8, scale: 2, comment: "The price of the product in USD"
    add_column :products, :stock_quantity, :integer, comment: "The current stock quantity of the product"
  end
end
```

> [`create_table`]:

Reviewer: Does this belong here?

Author: Good catch, thank you - moved it under Database Options.

This changes the column `part_number` on products table to be a `:text` field.

NOTE: The `change_column` command is **irreversible**. You should provide your
own `reversible` migration, you can read more about reversible migrations
[here](#using-reversible).

Besides `change_column`, the [`change_column_null`][] and
[`change_column_default`][] methods are used to change a null constraint and
default values of a column.

```ruby
change_column_null :products, :name, false
change_column_default :products, :approved, from: true, to: false
```

This sets `:name` field on products to a `NOT NULL` column and the default value
of the `:approved` field from true to false. Both of these changes will only be

> applied to future transactions, any existing records do not apply.

Reviewer 2: The word 'transactions' feels a bit unclear here, maybe this instead?

```suggestion
applied to future records, any existing records do not change.
```

> When setting the null constraint to true, this means that column will accept a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting the null constraint to `true` implies that column will accept a
```

This changes the column `part_number` on products table to be a `:text` field.

> NOTE: The `change_column` command is **irreversible**. You should provide your

Reviewer: What does it mean 'You should provide'...does that mean it is always better not to use 'change_column' or does it mean that it doesn't change in a backwards direction?

Author: It means the latter. Active Record doesn't know how to reverse this type of migration, so you will need to provide instructions on how to reverse it via the migration using `reversible`. I'll update this to make it clearer as well.

Author: NOTE: The `change_column` command is **irreversible**. To ensure your migration
can be safely reverted, you will need to provide your own `reversible`
migration. You can read more about reversible migrations
[here](#using-reversible).

```ruby
change_column_null :products, :name, false
change_column_default :products, :approved, from: true, to: false
```

This sets `:name` field on products to a `NOT NULL` column and the default value
of the `:approved` field from true to false. Both of these changes will only be
applied to future records, any existing records do not change.

Setting the null constraint to `true` implies that column will accept a
null value, otherwise the `NOT NULL` constraint is applied and a value must be
passed in order to persist the record to the database.

NOTE: You could also write the above `change_column_default` migration as
`change_column_default :products, :approved, false`, but unlike the previous
example, this would make your migration irreversible.

[`change_column`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-change_column
[`change_column_default`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-change_column_default
[`change_column_null`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-change_column_null

> ### Column Modifiers

Reviewer: This feels like it should be the intro to 'Passing Modifiers' above (line 342).

Author: I updated the intro to Passing Modifiers separately to make it more clear.

add_reference :users, :role
```

> This migration will create a foreign key column called `role_id` in the users

Reviewer: This section also feels like it should be above with Creating Associations.

Author: This is a tough one because it belongs here too if the sections are read in isolation (which is how I mostly read the docs). Moving it to the "Creating Associations" section means we lose the explanation here. In addition, the "Creating Associations" section Is part of the Generating Migrations section which mostly focuses on the generators rather than what the actual methods in the generated files are doing. However, I still think it's valuable to have that info when you're looking at what was generated in the file, hence, I added a similar explanation to the "Creating Associations sections" but specific to the example.

```

> This migration will create a `role_id` column in the users table. It creates an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This migration will create a `role_id` column in the users table that is a foreign key that references the `id` column in the `roles` table. It creates an
```

> ```

Reviewer: What's the difference between add_reference plus foreign_key: true, and add_foreign_key?

Author: Good question! 

I added a note: 

NOTE: When using `references` in a migration, you are creating a new column in
the table and you'll have the option to add a foreign key using `foreign_key:
true` to that column. However, if you want to add a foreign key to an existing
column, you can use `add_foreign_key`.

This [`add_foreign_key`][] call adds a new constraint to the `articles` table.
The constraint guarantees that a row in the `authors` table exists where the

> `id` column matches the `articles.author_id`.

Reviewer: The constraint guarantees that a row in the `authors` table exists where the
`id` column matches the `articles.author_id` to ensure all reviewers listed in the articles table are valid authors listed in the authors table.

Author: ✅

> If the `from_table` column name cannot be derived from the `to_table` name, you

Reviewer: "If the `from_table` column name cannot be derived from the `to_table` name" - what does this mean? Can this be made more clear?

Author: This was just quoted from the API guides, I've expanded the definition in the description and avoided using the param names `from_table` and `to_table`. Hopefully this, together with the example below helps explain it better. 

```
If the column name of the table to which we're adding the foreign key cannot be
derived from the table with the referenced primary key then you can use the
`:column` option to specify the column name. Additionally, you can use the
`:primary_key` option if the referenced primary key is not `:id`.
```

```

INFO: Tables with composite primary keys require passing array values rather
than integer IDs to many methods. See also the [Active Record Composite Primary
Keys](active_record_composite_primary_keys.html) guide to learn more.

### Execute Arbitrary SQL

> If the helpers provided by Active Record aren't enough you can use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the helpers provided by Active Record aren't enough, you can use the
```

[`execute`][] method to execute arbitrary SQL. For example,

```ruby
class UpdateProductPrices < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def up

>     execute "UPDATE products SET price = 'free' WHERE 1=1;"

Reviewer 2: Should we add a caveat/note to this example? Otherwise, it might this example might imply that changing data (i.e the value of the 'price' column) like this in a migration is common/recommended.

[`change_table`][] is also reversible, as long as the block only calls
reversible operations like the ones listed above.

> If you're going to need to use any other methods, you should use `reversible` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to use any other methods, you should use `reversible` or
```

### Using `reversible`

If you'd like for a migration to do something that Active Record doesn't know
how to reverse, then you can use `reversible`:

```ruby
class ChangeProductsPrice < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    reversible do |direction|
      change_table :products do |t|
        direction.up   { t.change :price, :string }
        direction.down { t.change :price, :integer }
      end
    end
  end
end
```

This migration will change the type of the `price` column to a string, or back
to an integer when the migration is reverted. Notice the block being passed to
`direction.up` and `direction.down` respectively.

Alternatively, you can use `up` and `down` instead of `change`:

```ruby
class ChangeProductsPrice < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def up
    change_table :products do |t|
      t.change :price, :string
    end
  end

  def down
    change_table :products do |t|
      t.change :price, :integer
    end
  end
end
```

Additionally, `reversible` can be useful is for executing raw SQL queries or
performing a database operations that do not have a direct equivalent in
ActiveRecord methods. You can use [`reversible`][] to specify what to do when

> running a migration and what else to do when reverting it. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, `reversible` is useful when executing raw SQL queries or
performing database operations that do not have a direct equivalent in
ActiveRecord methods. You can use [`reversible`][] to specify what to do when
running a migration and what else to do when reverting it. For example:
```

[`remove_timestamps`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-remove_timestamps
[`rename_column`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-rename_column
[`remove_columns`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-remove_columns
[`rename_index`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-rename_index
[`rename_table`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-rename_table

### Using `reversible`

If you'd like for a migration to do something that Active Record doesn't know
how to reverse, then you can use `reversible`:

```ruby
class ChangeProductsPrice < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    reversible do |direction|
      change_table :products do |t|
        direction.up   { t.change :price, :string }
        direction.down { t.change :price, :integer }
      end
    end
  end
end
```

> This migration will change the type of the `price` column to a string, or back

Reviewer: To me the above code examples reads as: any price before this migration is a string, but any price after this migration will be an integer. 
The below explanation, however, reads as: From this migration the price will be a string, but if the migration is reverted it will be an integer (again).
If the latter is the case, then this sentence that was removed would be helpful to put back in part: If you'd like for a migration to do something that Active Record doesn't know how to reverse, then you can use `reversible` **to specify what to do when running a migration and what else to do when reverting it.**

Author: ✅

> 

Reviewer: Above it says: In such cases, you can raise `ActiveRecord::IrreversibleMigration` in your
`down` block.

How would you do that?

Author: Added an example to the section: 

```ruby
class IrreversibleMigrationExample < ActiveRecord::Migration[8.0]
  def up
    drop_table :example_table
  end

  def down
    raise ActiveRecord::IrreversibleMigration, "This migration cannot be reverted because it destroys data."
  end
end
```

The very first migration related rails command you will use will probably be
`bin/rails db:migrate`. In its most basic form it just runs the `change` or `up`
method for all the migrations that have not yet been run. If there are no such
migrations, it exits. It will run these migrations in order based on the date of
the migration.

Note that running the `db:migrate` command also invokes the `db:schema:dump`
command, which will update your `db/schema.rb` file to match the structure of
your database.

If you specify a target version, Active Record will run the required migrations
(change, up, down) until it has reached the specified version. The version is
the numerical prefix on the migration's filename. For example, to migrate to

> version 20080906120000 run:

Reviewer 2: minor nit: should we update this date to be something in 2024? to show that the guides have been updated since 2008 :)

$ bin/rails db:rollback
```

This will rollback the latest migration, either by reverting the `change` method
or by running the `down` method. If you need to undo several migrations you can
provide a `STEP` parameter:

```bash
$ bin/rails db:rollback STEP=3
```

The last 3 migrations will be reverted.

The `db:migrate:redo` command is a shortcut for doing a rollback and then
migrating back up again. As with the `db:rollback` command, you can use the

> `STEP` parameter if you need to go more than one version back, for example:

Reviewer 2: Might be worth adding something about *why* would you want to do a `db:migrate:redo`? If you've locally modified a new migration, for example.

```bash
$ bin/rails db:migrate:redo STEP=3
```

> Neither of these rails commands do anything you could not do with `db:migrate`.

Reviewer 2: Simpler way to word this maybe something like this? Without the double negative :)

```suggestion
Both of these commands are shortcuts for what you can also do with `db:migrate`.
```

They are there for convenience, since you do not need to explicitly specify the
version to migrate to.

#### Transactions

In databases that support transactions with statements that change the schema,
each migration is wrapped in a transaction.

INFO: A transaction ensures that if a migration fails partway through, any
changes that were successfully applied are rolled back, maintaining database
consistency. This means that either all operations within the transaction are
executed successfully, or none of them are, preventing the database from being
left in an inconsistent state if an error occurs during the transaction.

If the database does not support transactions with statements that change the
schema, then when a migration fails, the parts of it that have succeeded will
not be rolled back. You will have to rollback the changes manually.

NOTE: There are certain queries that can't run inside a transaction. If your
adapter supports DDL transactions you can use `disable_ddl_transaction!` method
to disable transactions for a single migration, allowing these queries to be
executed outside the transactional boundary.

> ### Setup the Database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setting up the Database
```

In databases that support transactions with statements that change the schema,
each migration is wrapped in a transaction.

INFO: A transaction ensures that if a migration fails partway through, any
changes that were successfully applied are rolled back, maintaining database
consistency. This means that either all operations within the transaction are
executed successfully, or none of them are, preventing the database from being
left in an inconsistent state if an error occurs during the transaction.

If the database does not support transactions with statements that change the
schema, then when a migration fails, the parts of it that have succeeded will
not be rolled back. You will have to rollback the changes manually.

NOTE: There are certain queries that can't run inside a transaction. If your
adapter supports DDL transactions you can use `disable_ddl_transaction!` method
to disable transactions for a single migration, allowing these queries to be
executed outside the transactional boundary.

### Setting Up the Database

The `bin/rails db:setup` command will create the database, load the schema, and
initialize it with the seed data.

### Preparing the Database

> 

Reviewer: Can we change the next line to: The `bin/rails db:prepare` command is similar to `bin/rails db:setup`, but it operates idempotently, so it can safely be called several times, but it will only perform the necessary tasks once.

Author: ✅ I love this change!

### Resetting the Database

The `bin/rails db:reset` command will drop the database and set it up again.
This is functionally equivalent to `bin/rails db:drop db:setup`.

NOTE: This is not the same as running all the migrations. It will only use the
contents of the current `db/schema.rb` or `db/structure.sql` file. If a
migration can't be rolled back, `bin/rails db:reset` may not help you. To find
out more about dumping the schema see [Schema Dumping and You][] section.

[Schema Dumping and You]: #schema-dumping-and-you

### Running Specific Migrations

If you need to run a specific migration up or down, the `db:migrate:up` and
`db:migrate:down` commands will do that. Just specify the appropriate version
and the corresponding migration will have its `change`, `up` or `down` method
invoked, for example:

```bash
$ bin/rails db:migrate:up VERSION=20240428000000
```

By running this command the `change` method (or the `up` method) will be
executed for the migration with the version "20240428000000".

First, this command will check whether the migration exists and if it has

> already been performed and will do nothing if so.

Reviewer: First, this command will check whether the migration exists and if it has
already been performed and if so, it will do nothing.

Author: ✅

==  CreateProducts: migrated (10.0054s) =======================================
```

If you want Active Record to not output anything, then running `bin/rails
db:migrate VERBOSE=false` will suppress all output.

[`say`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Migration.html#method-i-say
[`say_with_time`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Migration.html#method-i-say_with_time
[`suppress_messages`]:

>     https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Migration.html#method-i-suppress_messages

Reviewer 2: Interesting. TIL. Never seen these methods.

Rails will extract the version number (20240428000000) from the filename and
insert it into the schema_migrations table after the migration has been
successfully executed.

You can view the contents of the schema_migrations table directly in your
database management tool or by using Rails console:

```irb
rails dbconsole
```

Then, within the database console, you can query the schema_migrations table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM schema_migrations;
```

This will show you a list of all migration version numbers that have been
applied to the database. Rails uses this information to determine which
migrations need to be run when you run rails db:migrate or rails db:migrate:up
commands.

Changing Existing Migrations
----------------------------

Occasionally you will make a mistake when writing a migration. If you have
already run the migration, then you cannot just edit the migration and run the
migration again: Rails thinks it has already run the migration and so will do
nothing when you run `bin/rails db:migrate`. You must rollback the migration
(for example with `bin/rails db:rollback`), edit your migration, and then run
`bin/rails db:migrate` to run the corrected version.

> In general, editing existing migrations is not a good idea. You will be creating

Reviewer 2: Might be worth clarifying this, since it's perfectly fine to edit a brand new migration that you created locally and that has never been pushed up yet.

One possible suggestion:
```suggestion
In general, editing existing migrations is not a good idea, once it's been committed and pushed. You will be creating
```

extra work for yourself and your co-workers and cause major headaches if the
existing version of the migration has already been run on production machines.

Instead, you should write a new migration that performs the changes you require.
Editing a freshly generated migration that has not yet been committed to source
control (or, more generally, which has not been propagated beyond your

> development machine) is relatively harmless.

Reviewer 2: Oh looks like there is something about my above comment. So maybe moving that up? Otherwise it seems like we're contradicting ourselves.

It tends to be faster and less error prone to create a new instance of your
application's database by loading the schema file via `bin/rails db:schema:load`
than it is to replay the entire migration history. [Old migrations][] may fail
to apply correctly if those migrations use changing external dependencies or
rely on application code which evolves separately from your migrations.

> Schema files are also useful if you want a quick look at what attributes an

Reviewer 2: I use schema.rb constantly for this purpose. Might be worth calling this out in a TIP or something?

Active Record and Referential Integrity
---------------------------------------

> The Active Record way suggests that intelligence should primarily reside in your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Active Record pattern suggests that intelligence should primarily reside in your
```

guarantee referential integrity and so some people augment them with [foreign
key constraints][] in the database.

In practice, foreign key constraints and unique indexes are generally considered
safer when enforced at the database level. Although Active Record does not
provide direct support for working with these database-level features, you can

> still use the execute method to run arbitrary SQL commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
still use the execute methods to run arbitrary SQL commands.
```

Author: I'm not sure that I understand the suggested change "method" to "methods" here? Maybe you can expand on it please? I'm referring to the execute method specifically. i.e. https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/DatabaseStatements.html#method-i-execute 

Side note: I could probably link to it here as well like I do above.

It's worth emphasizing that while the Active Record pattern emphasizes keeping
intelligence within models, neglecting to implement foreign keys and unique
constraints at the database level can potentially lead to integrity issues.
Therefore, it's advisable to complement the AR pattern with database-level
constraints where appropriate. These constraints should have their counterparts
explicitly defined in your code using associations and validations to ensure

> data integrity across both application and database layers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data integrity across both application and database layers.
```

guarantee referential integrity and so some people augment them with [foreign
key constraints][] in the database.

In practice, foreign key constraints and unique indexes are generally considered
safer when enforced at the database level. Although Active Record does not
provide direct support for working with these database-level features, you can
still use the execute method to run arbitrary SQL commands.

It's worth emphasizing that while the Active Record pattern emphasizes keeping
intelligence within models, neglecting to implement foreign keys and unique
constraints at the database level can potentially lead to integrity issues.
Therefore, it's advisable to complement the AR pattern with database-level
constraints where appropriate. These constraints should have their counterparts
explicitly defined in your code using associations and validations to ensure
data integrity across both application and database layers.

[foreign key constraints]: #foreign-keys

Migrations and Seed Data
------------------------

> The main purpose of Rails migration feature is to issue commands that modify the

Reviewer: of the Rails migration feature

Author: ✅
